WARC/1.0
WARC-Type: response
WARC-Date: 2012-02-11T07:31:30Z
WARC-TREC-ID: clueweb12-0006wb-79-17098
WARC-IP-Address: 198.161.90.112
WARC-Payload-Digest: sha1:UHNBKYQQYOUHU2LIJ65TEC363AUVM5S4
WARC-Target-URI: http://oldfraser.lexi.net/publications/tax_reform/grubel_1.html
WARC-Record-ID: <urn:uuid:259b32b6-06dc-4653-ae38-4c461ae040bb>
Content-Type: application/http; msgtype=response
Content-Length: 61015

HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Date: Sat, 11 Feb 2012 07:31:33 GMT
Server: Apache
Last-Modified: Tue, 26 Oct 2004 18:41:24 GMT
ETag: "dd2009-ed3c-3e75e0e5c3d00"
Accept-Ranges: bytes
Content-Length: 60732
Connection: close
Content-Type: text/html; charset=utf-8
X-Pad: avoid browser bug

<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Strict//EN" "DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd">

<HTML>
<HEAD>
<LINK REL="stylesheet" TYPE="text/css" HREF="/style/fi_base.css" />
<TITLE>The Fraser Institute: Tax Reform in Canada:  Our Path to Greater Prosperity</TITLE>

<SCRIPT TYPE="text/javascript" SRC="/style/buttonbar.js">
</SCRIPT>


<META HTTP-EQUIV="Content-Type" CONTENT="text/html; charset=ISO-8859-1" />

</HEAD>
<BODY>
<TABLE CLASS="pagelayout" SUMMARY="layout">
<TR>
<TD CLASS="buttonbar"><A HREF="http://www.fraserinstitute.ca/"><IMG SRC="/img/frlogo.gif" ALT="Fraser Institute Logo" BORDER="0" /></A><BR />
<BR />
 <A HREF="http://oldfraser.lexi.net/cgi-bin/oldfraser.lexi.net/search_oldfraser.cgi" onmouseover="imgOn('search');return true;" onmouseout="imgOff('search');"><IMG NAME="search" ID="search" SRC="/img/navbar/searchoff.gif" ALT="Search" BORDER="0" /></A><BR />
 <A HREF="/media/media_releases/" onmouseover="imgOn('media');return true;" onmouseout="imgOff('media');"><IMG NAME="media" ID="media" SRC="/img/navbar/mediaoff.gif" ALT="Media Releases" BORDER="0" /></A><BR />
 <A HREF="/events/" onmouseover="imgOn('events');return true;" onmouseout="imgOff('events');"><IMG NAME="events" ID="events" SRC="/img/navbar/eventsoff.gif" ALT="Events" BORDER="0" /></A><BR />
 <A HREF="/publications/online_publications.html" onmouseover="imgOn('online');return true;" onmouseout="imgOff('online');"><IMG NAME="online" ID="online" SRC="/img/navbar/onlineoff.gif" ALT="Online Publications" BORDER="0" /></A><BR />
 <A HREF="/publications/" onmouseover="imgOn('order');return true;" onmouseout="imgOff('order');"><IMG NAME="order" ID="order" SRC="/img/navbar/orderoff.gif" ALT="Order Publications" BORDER="0" /></A><BR />
 <A HREF="/student/" onmouseover="imgOn('student');return true;" onmouseout="imgOff('student');"><IMG NAME="student" ID="student" SRC="/img/navbar/studentoff.gif" ALT="Student" BORDER="0" /></A><BR />
 <A HREF="/radio.html" onmouseover="imgOn('radio');return true;" onmouseout="imgOff('radio');"><IMG NAME="radio" ID="radio" SRC="/img/navbar/radiooff.gif" ALT="Radio" BORDER="0" /></A><BR />
 <A HREF="/national_media_archive/" onmouseover="imgOn('archive');return true;" onmouseout="imgOff('archive');"><IMG NAME="archive" ID="archive" SRC="/img/navbar/archiveoff.gif" ALT="National Media Archive" BORDER="0" /></A><BR />
 <A HREF="/membership.html" onmouseover="imgOn('membership');return true;" onmouseout="imgOff('membership');"><IMG NAME="membership" ID="membership" SRC="/img/navbar/membershipoff.gif" ALT="Membership" BORDER="0" /></A><BR />
 <A HREF="/links.html" onmouseover="imgOn('resources');return true;" onmouseout="imgOff('resources');"><IMG NAME="resources" ID="resources" SRC="/img/navbar/resourcesoff.gif" ALT="Other Resources" BORDER="0" /></A><BR />
 <A HREF="/employment/" onmouseover="imgOn('employment');return true;" onmouseout="imgOff('employment');"><IMG NAME="employment" ID="employment" SRC="/img/navbar/employmentoff.gif" ALT="Employment" BORDER="0" /></A><BR />
 <A HREF="/about_us/" onmouseover="imgOn('about');return true;" onmouseout="imgOff('about');"><IMG NAME="about" ID="about" SRC="/img/navbar/aboutoff.gif" ALT="About Us" BORDER="0" /></A><BR />
 

<P><A HREF="http://www.freetheworld.com/"> <IMG SRC="/img/animglobe.gif" ALT="Spinning World Icon" BORDER="0" /><BR />
 <SMALL>The<BR />
Economic Freedom<BR />
Network</SMALL></A></P>
</TD>

<TD>&nbsp;</TD>

<TD CLASS="body">

<H1 CLASS="title">The Fraser Institute: Tax Reform in Canada:  Our Path to Greater Prosperity</H1>

<H4 align="center">A Fraser Institute Conference, <br>October 11, 2001, Toronto, Ontario, Canada</H4>

<!-- begin_body -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
[<a href="index.html">Contents</a>]

<h2>Why there should be no Capital Gains Tax</h2>

<blockquote>Herbert Grubel<br>
Professor of Economics (Emeritus), Simon Fraser University<br>
Senior Fellow and David Somerville Chair, The Fraser Institute<br>
<a href="mailto:herbert.grubel@home.com">herbert.grubel@home.com</a>
</blockquote>

<p>A paper to be presented at the conference "TAX REFORM IN CANADA: Our Path to
Greater Prosperity", sponsored by the Fraser Institute, held in Toronto on
October 11, 2001.</p>

<p>First draft – September 21, 2001<br clear="all" />
</p>

<p>Canada's taxation policies should be under constant review in the light of
new empirical information about its performance and the merit of alternatives. 
One would expect that after a long period when few changes were made, some
major reforms would be very beneficial.  In addition, fiscal surpluses, as had
been predicted for some years into the future, tend to offer the opportunity to
reform the system without the constraint of neutral revenue effects, which
would make it possible to have every conceivable interest group emerge with
lower tax burdens.</p>

<p>Alas, the economic slowdown of the last year and the terror attacks on
September 11 and their aftermath have eliminated the prospect of fiscal
surpluses.  However, prosperity and surpluses are certain to return at some
point in the future.  It is therefor important to consider now what changes in
tax policy are warranted at this time.  Some of these changes might even be
justified in a fiscal environment without surpluses.</p>

<p>I am also hopeful that the ideas for tax policy changes presented at this
gathering will stimulate the government into having a major review of its own. 
Such a review is long overdue and it would, at relatively little cost, force a
broader public debate on the issues than we can generate with the much more
limited resources at our command.</p>

<p>Nearly 30 years after the imposition of the capital gains tax in Canada in
1972, the time has come to reassess the empirical judgements, which provided
the rationale for the tax.  There are four such empirical issues.  First, how
large is the loss in income created by the tax; second, how much does the tax
equalize after-tax incomes; third, what are the revenue implications of
eliminating the tax and fourth, how difficult is it to prevent shifting of
taxable income into non-taxable capital gains.</p>

<h3>I.       Efficiency Implications</h3>

<p>There is widespread agreement among experts that the capital gains tax,
along with other taxes on capital, reduces the size of Canada's capital stock
and therefore labor productivity and overall living standards.  The reasons for
this result are readily summarized in a simple analogy.  Taxes on consumption
and income are like taxes on the fruits of a tree.  Sharing the fruits with the
government does not diminish future harvests.  Taxes on capital, on the other
hand, damage the tree and reduce the size of harvests in the future.  There are
two basic ways in which the capital gains tax causes this damage.</p>

<h4>Lower Capital Stock</h4>

<p>First, in an integrated global capital market, investors equalize in all
countries the risk-adjusted rates of return after taxes.  If a small country,
like Canada, imposes a capital gains tax, the actions of investors raise the
pre-tax return on capital until the after tax return is made once more equal to
that in the rest of the world.  The actors in this process are not just
foreigners but also Canadians, who have the option of placing their money
anywhere in the world.</p>

<p>          The higher the interest payable on capital, the less industry can
afford to borrow.  As a result, Canada's total capital stock is smaller than it
would be without the capital gains tax.  Since productivity of labor is an
increasing function of the capital stock, the smaller amount of capital in
Canada is associated with lower output and living standards.</p>

<p>The imposition of the capital gains tax tends to have its impact
only slowly since it takes time for the capital stock to fall.  In addition,
the effect tends to be hidden because the growing overall wealth in the world
continuously raises the stock of capital and it is difficult to notice that
this growth would have been greater in the absence of a capital gains tax.</p>

<h4>The Lock-in Effect</h4>

<p>Second, the capital gains tax causes damage to the productivity of capital
by creating a so-called lock-in effect, which arises because the tax creates a
wedge between the private and social rate of return of capital.  In the absence
of the tax, an investment in a company with expected low earnings causes it to
be sold and the funds to be reinvested in other companies yielding a higher
rate of return.  This turnover of capital is part of the dynamism, the process
of creative destruction, of an efficient economy.  In the absence of a capital
gains tax, small differences in return causes such reallocations of capital as
long as transactions costs are covered by the higher yield.  However, if the
sale of an asset leads to a capital gain, this efficient process of
reallocating capital is short-circuited.</p>

<p>          Consider an investor who holds an asset worth $100.  The future
rate of return is assessed to be 9 percent and thus brings $9 annually.  In the
absence of the capital gains tax, the asset would be sold and reinvested in a
comparable company assumed to exist and with a return of 10 percent, bringing
an annual income of $10.  But now consider that the sale of the asset gives
rise to a $20 capital gains tax obligation, leaving only $80 for reinvestment
in the higher yielding asset.  If the investor holds on to the low yielding
asset, the income is $9, more than the $8 earned by selling it, paying the
capital gains tax and reinvesting in the higher yielding asset.  The rational
owner of the investment subject to the capital gains tax keeps his funds where
they are and is privately better off than if the asset were sold.  However,
society is worse off because funds are prevented from flowing from the lower
into the higher yielding investment - $1 per $100 in the preceding example.</p>

<p>          The quantitative effect of the lock-in effect is difficult to
estimate since the government has roll-over provisions for some types of
investment under which the capital gains tax is not payable if the reinvestment
takes place under a strict set of rules.  Assets held in tax-sheltered
investments like RRSPs do not pay taxes on capital gains.  And, of course,
there is no information on the yield and size of locked-in capital.  In Grubel
(2000), I report on these and other considerations.  Suffice it note here that
the lock-in effect undoubtedly has a negative effect on the productivity of
Canada's overall stock of capital and that it can be blamed for the empirical
estimates of the cost of the capital gains tax presented below.</p>


<h4>The Marginal Efficiency Cost of Taxes</h4>

<p>The ideas that taxes cause costly distortions and reduced supplies of the
taxed factor of production have been formalized in the theory of the marginal
efficiency cost of taxation.</p>

<p>This theory argues that a consumption tax tends to have the lowest
efficiency cost since every person needs to buy goods and services to maintain
desired living standards.  The highest efficiency costs in turn arise from the
taxation of capital, for reasons just discussed.  It is easy for wealthholders
not to save and invest but consume their income; to move their capital abroad
or to keep it locked up in less than optimal investments.</p>

<p>Estimates made by the Department of Finance in Canada and published by the
OECD (1997) suggest that the efficiency cost of taxes on capital is $1.55. 
That is, for every dollar raised, there is a loss of efficiency equal to
$1.55.  Put differently, if a private person has an investment yielding 10
percent and the government taxes it away, society will be poorer unless the
government invests the money in a project yielding 25.5 percent.</p>

<p>The most important implication of the marginal efficiency cost models is
that there exists an optimal mix of taxes because, according to the Department
of Finance study, the efficiency cost of sales and personal income taxes to be
only $.17 and $.56, respectively.  These estimates suggest that Canada's tax
system could be improved greatly by the elimination of taxes on capital and
their replacement by sales and personal taxes.<a href="#_ftn1" name="_ftnref1"
title="">1</a></p>

<h4>Quantitative Estimates of the Cost</h4>

<p>The preceding conclusions can be strengthened by considering studies of the
size of the output losses caused by capital gains taxation.  Such empirical
studies are very difficult because of the myriad of confounding changes in
policies, technology, terms of trade and demographics taking place at the same
time changes in capital gains taxes are implemented.  Moreover, there are few
distinct, major changes in capital gains taxation levels and structure.  And,
as noted above, the effects of the tax on the capital stock and productivity
are likely to take place over a prolonged period of time.</p>

<p>However, there are two sets of empirical information, which shed important
light on the cost of the capital gains tax.  The first was produced by Kugler
and Lenz (2001) for a Fraser Institute conference held in Vancouver last
year.<a href="#_ftn2" name="_ftnref2" title="">2</a>   This landmark study is
extremely simple in its conception and uses a unique set of data, which are
almost like those produced by a laboratory in the natural sciences.</p>

<p>The federal government of Switzerland does not have a capital gains tax. 
However, during the last 20 years, individual cantons have experimented with
the tax.  Kugler and Lenz showed that cantonal incomes between 1978 and 1995
followed a very similar trend since the same external factors and federal
policies affected the economies of all.  However, 8 of the cantons during the
period under study eliminated the capital gains tax in their jurisdiction while
the rest did not.  Regression analysis showed that the cantons, which
eliminated the tax, enjoyed a jump in cantonal income of 3.2 percent relative
to the income of those that retained the tax.  The time period under study is
too short to make reliable estimates of the effect on the trend rate of
economic growth caused by the elimination of the tax.</p>

<p>One obvious question about these empirical results is the extent to which
the gains of the cantons that abolished the tax were made at the expense of
those that had not.  The authors tested for this hypothesis and found no
evidence that the gains of some cantons came at the expense of others.</p>

<p>Undoubtedly, the study by Kugler and Lenz will receive careful scholarly
scrutiny and the precise estimate of the effect may change.  However, given the
strong theoretical basis underlying the specification of the model, there is
little doubt in my mind that the authors' general conclusion will stand up:</p>


<p><i>"The data ... suggest that the abolishment of the capital gains tax has
had positive and economically significant effects on the level of real income
in the cantons."</i> (Kugler and Lenz (2001), p.xx).</p>


<p>          The second set of empirical information is based on studies
concerned with the much broader issue of the economic benefits of replacing
indirect with direct taxes, or more specifically taxes on income with taxes on
consumption.  These studies draw on the experience of industrial countries,
which have significant differences in taxation systems and reliable data. 
Dahlby (2001) in his contribution to this conference presents a careful review
of the results of studies using this database.  He concludes:</p>


<p><i>"...recent econometric studies indicate that switching the tax mix toward
consumption taxes can significantly increase the growth rate of the economy. 
An increase in the annual economic growth rate on the order of a two-tenths of
a percentage point...would have a dramatic impact on Canadian living standards
over time.  The present value of the additional per capita output from
increasing the annual growth rate by two-tenths of a percentage point is 238
percent of current output, which represents an enormous gain...even if we have
overstated the growth effect...by a factor of 10... the present value of the
increase in per capita output would still be 22.3 percent of current output – a
very significant gain."</i>  (Dahlby (2001), p. x))</p>


<p>Dahlby's conclusion draws on the findings of studies, which considered the
entire range of indirect taxes, mainly taxes on labour and capital.  For this
reason, the empirical estimate quoted is not entirely relevant to the capital
gains tax alone, which produces only a small fraction of the entire revenue
from indirect taxes.  According to one estimate, the capital gains tax revenue
of the federal government in 1992 represented only .3 percent of all federal
taxes collected (Grubel (2000), p. 14).  Poddar and English estimated that
federal capital gains taxes represented only 21.1 percent of the total federal
tax on investment collected (Poddar and English (1999).  On the other hand, the
marginal efficiency of capital taxes generally and specifically the capital
gains tax is higher than that for other indirect taxes, which implies that its
replacement with a direct tax would have a disproportionately large effect,
albeit on a small base.</p>

<p>          Finally, I made a very simple calculation of the rate of economic
growth experienced in the period 1990-97 by OECD countries that do not have any
capital gains tax imposed by their federal government.   I found that Hong
Kong, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Singapore and Switzerland – countries
without the tax, had per capita growth rates of 2.2 percent while the rest of
the OECD countries grew at 1.2 percent.<a href="#_ftn3" name="_ftnref3" title=
"">3</a> </p>


<p><i>Conclusions</i></p>

<p>Theoretical considerations suggest that the efficiency cost of capital gains
taxation takes the form of a lower capital stock and its less efficient use
through the lock-in effect and the distortions caused by efforts to avoid the
tax.  All of these effects translate into lower productivity, per capita
incomes and living standards.</p>

<p>These theoretical considerations in turn have been used to make econometric
estimates of the quantitative effect on income.  The studies noted above are
not specific enough or sufficient in quantity to allow me to conclude that the
elimination of the capital gains tax in Canada would result in a certain
percentage increase in per capita incomes.  However, together, the empirical
evidence implies strongly that the capital gains tax has reduced Canadian
income by quantitatively significant amounts and that it will continue to do so
in the future.</p>

<p></p>

<h3>II.      The Effects on Equity</h3>

<p>Many Canadians believe that a necessary part of a desirable, good society is
a fair tax system and a fair distribution of income.  The concept of fairness
is value-laden and people are entitled to their own views on this subject. 
However, taking the pulse of public opinion – and possibly trying to provide
leadership – the political establishment decided in 1972 that a capital gains
tax in Canada would increase the fairness of the tax system according to norms
accepted by the majority of Canadians.</p>


<p><i>Fairness of the System – "a buck is a buck"</i></p>


<p>The public mood in the late 1960s and early 1970s was made receptive to the
imposition of a capital gains tax on the grounds that in its absence the <i>tax
system</i> is unfair in the sense that people with the same level of income pay
different amounts of taxes.  In economics jargon, the tax system did not meet
the criterion of horizontal equity.  The facts are quite straightforward. 
People who have capital gains during a period can increase their spending and
living standards (or add to their net worth) to the same degree as if they had
obtained the same amount of money in the form of wages, salaries or dividends. 
Since the latter types of income are taxed, capital gains should also be
taxed.</p>

<p>          The issue of horizontal equity was popularized by the catchy
slogan "a buck is a buck".  Its popular appeal was strengthened by reference to
the work of two serious scholars, Robert Haig (1921) and Henry Simons (1938). 
The so-called "Haig-Simons conditions continue to influence academic
discussions about capital gains taxation.</p>

<p>          The basic case for the taxation of capital gains on the grounds of
horizontal equity is logically valid as far as it goes.  However, for a number
of reasons, it rests on an incomplete understanding of the nature of capital
gains.</p>

<p>          First, in a scholarly paper Bruce Bartlett (2001) argues that
capital gains are not like income at all.  He supports his detailed arguments
by reference to the important fact that capital gains are not counted as income
in national accounts, which record the value of goods and services produced. 
He quotes Simon Kuznets, one of the creators of the national income accounts
"Capital gains and losses are not increments to or drafts upon the heap of
goods produced by the economic system for consumption or for stock destined for
future use, and hence they should be excluded." (Kuznets (1941), p. 12).</p>

<p>          Bartlett concludes that Haig and Simons did not address the issue
raised by Kuznets, if capital gains are not considered to add to national
income, how can they considered to add to personal, taxable income?</p>


<p><i>"In truth, their (Haig and Simons) rationalization for taxation of
capital gains rested more on ideological grounds than scientific analysis.  As
Haig once put it, 'an income tax which would allow capital gains to escape
unscathed would, in this country at least, be an ethical monstrosity.'  Simons
too the same basic view.  'The main and decisive case for inclusion of capital
gains rests on the fact that equity among individuals is impossible under an
income tax which disregards such items of gain and loss.'"</i>  Bartlett
(2001), p. 12-13.<a href="#_ftn4" name="_ftnref4" title="">4</a></p>

<p>Second, a large proportion of capital gains are illusory increases in
spending power of their owners since they are caused by inflation.  Thus,
between 1972 and 1991 consumer prices rose 3.8 times while investments in the
TSE increased only 2.9 times.  Therefore, capital gains reported on such TSE
investments were entirely nominal.  Economic developments did not allow the
owners of such capital gains to increase their spending as if the money had
come from work.  Their net worth was reduced.<a href="#_ftn5" name="_ftnref5"
title="">5</a></p>

<p>          It is argued that the system of capital gains taxation in Canada
takes account of inflation by requiring the inclusion in taxable income only
one half of the realized capital gains.  The preceding data on stock market
investments over nearly 20 years show that this provision is not adequate.  The
exclusion from taxation of 50 percent of the nominal gains still meant that
taxes were due on real losses.  In addition, the inclusion rate introduces a
bias in the rate at which investments are taxed depending on the length of time
over which they have been held.  Thus, when inflation is moderate, the 50
percent exemption is likely to more than compensate for capital gains held for
a short period.  On the other hand, for long-term investments, the exemption is
likely to equal the actual rate of inflation, as was the case in the stock
market example given in the preceding paragraph.<a href="#_ftn6" name=
"_ftnref6" title="">6</a></p>

<p>          Third, real capital gains tend to be a return to risk-taking by
investors willing to place their funds in new ventures.  Such new
entrepreneurial ventures are very important for technological progress and for
raising the productivity of investment.  Unfortunately, such innovative
activities often fail.  Therefore, to attract investors, those that are
successful, have to be rewarded with high rates of return.  In the case of many
of the new information technology firms, in fact, most of the return to the
entrepreneurs have tended to take the form of capital gains on shares they
owned when the firm went public.</p>

<p>In principle, the ability to offset capital losses against capital gains in
the determination of taxes owed.  In practice, this principle works with
venture capitalists with enough resources to have portfolios with stakes in
many start-up enterprises.  However, most individual investors are not in such
a position and the capital gains tax reduces the expected and realized returns
to risk-taking.</p>

<p>The lower the return to an activity, such as risk-taking associated with
innovation, the less of it is supplied.  As a result, economic growth and the
living standards of Canadians are lowered correspondingly.  The reduced risk
taking due to the capital gains tax in effect is one of the reasons why the
marginal efficiency cost of capital gains taxation is so high.  In this
important sense, the slogan "a buck is a buck" is incorrect.  A buck earned
through capital gains has more detrimental effects on productivity growth than
does a buck earned through wages.</p>

<p>A corollary of the horizontal equity argument is that creative bookkeeping
and tax planning make it possible for people to shift taxable personal and
investment income into non-taxable capital gains.  To the extent that this
opportunity is exercised, Canada's system of taxation is even less fair than it
would be otherwise since it allows some Canadians to escape tax payment
altogether while the resources at their disposal, if earned as a salary, would
draw large tax payments.</p>

<p>          As noted above, this argument has been used by proponents of the
capital gains tax during the period leading up to its introduction in 1972.  At
the 2000 Fraser Institute symposium on capital gains taxation, the empirical
importance of such income shifting was discussed in the context of the
experience of a number of countries that do not have capital gains taxes.  This
subject deserves a longer discussion and is found in below in Part IV.</p>


<p>Vertical Equity – "the rich get richer..."</p>

<p>Public opinion in Canada and most other countries is very much concerned
with the fairness of the <i>distribution of income</i> and wealth.  They
believe that in a good society the poor are raised out of poverty by government
programs and transfers financed out of taxes paid by high income earners.  In
particular, the public considers it to be important that government policies
prevent "the rich from getting richer and the poor from getting poorer", a
slogan that is used frequently and effectively by the proponents for what
economists have called "vertical equity".  Politicians have responded to these
popular demands for greater vertical equity by the creation of progressive
income taxes, the double taxation of income from property and the provision of
a wide and generous social security program.</p>

<p>          These income redistribution policies give rise to many questions
of principle and fact, which cannot be discussed here.  Suffice it to note that
the top 10 percent of all income earners in Canada have traditionally paid
around 45 percent of all <i>income taxes</i>.  Is it really fair to add to this
high burden capital gains taxes, which further add to this burden of this top
10 percent of the income earners?<a href="#_ftn7" name="_ftnref7" title=
"">7</a></p>

<p>          Another problem associated with the redistribution policy is that
it does not so much reallocate income between individuals and families as it
does for individuals through time.  This is so because people go through life
cycles of income.  They have relatively low incomes when young and without work
experience.  They have high incomes during the middle and late years before
retirement.  When they have stopped working, they tend to have again relatively
low incomes (and relatively large assets out of which they finance their
retirement).</p>

<p>It is possible to simulate the income distribution, which results under the
assumption that there are several generations of people at different phases of
their life cycle.  Drawing on actual incomes of Canadians in the different age
groups, Sarlo (1997) reports that perfect equality of income of Canadians
during their lifetimes results in a static income distribution, which closely
resembles that observed in Canada.  In other words, a very large proportion of
the income inequality that allegedly requires strong equalization policies by
government is due to nothing more than the fact that people tend to have
relatively low incomes when they are young and old.  Capital gains taxation
does not equalize across the size distribution of income as much as it forces
equalization of incomes through life.</p>

<p>          A third reason to question the validity of the argument in favor
of income redistribution was presented to me a number of times by Canadians
during private discussions and following my presentation of the economics of
capital gains taxation.  These Canadians asked "What is fair about taking away
from some the rewards of their work, investment and risk-taking and
transferring it to those who have worked less hard, saved and invested less and
took fewer risks".</p>

<p>Answers to this question are very divisive since, of course, there are also
many Canadians who have worked hard, saved and did all the right things but
fate intervened and they have low incomes because of illness, accidents or
simply bad luck.  Most Canadians believe that such people deserve a helping
hand from society.  The basic problem associated with all policies of income
and wealth redistribution is the difficulties associated with identifying those
who deserve support because their condition is due to forces beyond their
control and those who are responsible for their state of need as a result of
their own decisions.</p>

<p>It is important to raise these considerations about the causes of need in
the present context where the case of the capital gains tax rests to some
degree on the demand for greater income equality through government policies. 
Politicians should be aware that a growing number of Canadians are concerned
about this problem.  They should also lead a discussion on the role that
private charity should play in alleviating the conditions of those with low
incomes.</p>


<p><i>Is the Tax on the Rich?</i></p>


<p>The taxation of capital gains is considered to be highly desirable by the
proponents of greater vertical equity in the distribution of income because of
statistics, which show that the rich pay most of the capital gains taxes.</p>

<p>          Calculations made by Joel Emes of the Fraser Institute<a href=
"#_ftn8" name="_ftnref8" title="">8</a>, using a data base supplied by Revenue
Canada found the following: in 1992 families with income of $100,000 and more
paid 78 percent of all capital gains taxes.  Families with income of $50,000 or
less paid only 8 percent of the total.  In looking at these numbers, it should
be remembered that only 7.9 percent of all Canadian families in 1992 had
incomes above $100,000.</p>

<p>          However, the validity of these data has been questioned on the
basis of the fact that the income used to classify families includes capital
gains.  As a result, it is possible that the statistics on the high-income
earners are misleading.  These apparently rich Canadians may have much lower
incomes in years other then the one in which they report their capital gains
and pay the tax.</p>

<p>          Emes examined this issue employing the same 1992 data he had used
to produce the conventional statistics on the incidence of the capital gains
tax just discussed.  He found that those Canadian families with <i>incomes
other than capital gains</i> over $100,000 in 1992 paid only 26.8 percent of
all such taxes.  Families with less than $50,000 of such non-capital gain
incomes paid 52.1 percent.</p>

<p>          These results can be explained most easily in the context of the
normal life cycle of incomes.  The owners of a small business often take out
little income annually and reinvest much of their profits to expand their
business, keep up with the competition and, most important, to build up a
nest-egg for their retirement.  When these owners of small businesses sell it
to retire, they appear as "rich" Canadians in the statistics of that year.  In
fact, of course, their incomes both before and after the event often do not
make them the kind of high-income earners at whom the capital gains tax is
aimed in order to create greater vertical equity.<a href="#_ftn9" name=
"_ftnref9" title="">9</a></p>

<p>          In addition, during the last few decades Canadians from all
segments of the income distribution have increasingly invested savings in
mutual funds.  Under present rules, when a mutual fund sells assets and makes
capital gains, they give rise to capital gains tax obligations by the
individual owners of the mutual funds.  As a result, many Canadians with low
and modest incomes have had the personal, unpleasant surprise of facing
unanticipated tax obligations when they file their annual returns.  Some have
had to sell part of their fund holdings to generate the cash needed to pay the
tax collector.  These reactions of wealthholders to the capital gains tax
induce an inefficient turnover in capital and contribute to the marginal
efficiency cost of taxes on capital noted above.</p>


<p><i>The Incidence of the Tax</i></p>


<p>Economists tend to stress the fact that a tax on automobiles does not
depress the return on the capital earned in the industry.  In other words, the
big automobile companies are not paying the tax because, as analyzed above, a
small country like Canada needs to maintain a competitive after-tax rate of
return on capital.  Instead, a tax on automobiles leads to higher prices, which
are paid by all Canadians, who buy cars.  It is therefore largely illusory to
believe that a tax on cars leads to lower returns to the owners of capital and
the greater equality of after-tax income demanded by many.</p>

<p>          There is a strict analogy between the analysis of the incidence of
a sales tax on automobiles and any tax on capital employed in the automobile
and other industries in Canada.  As noted above, the imposition of a capital
gains tax leads to a rise in the before-tax rate of return to assure that the
after-tax rate in Canada remains the same as that prevailing in the rest of the
world. The higher after-tax returns lead to a lower capital stock per worker
and therefore lower wages.  Labor, not the owners of capital end up paying the
capital gains tax.</p>

<p>It is important to remember this argument in the present context of the
analysis of equity issues, especially since this burden on labor falls more on
those with low incomes who spend a much larger share of their incomes than the
rich on goods and services.  Therefore, it is largely illusory to believe that
the capital gains tax results in a greater equality of income.<a href="#_ftn10"
name="_ftnref10" title="">10</a></p>


<p><i>Conclusions</i></p>

<p>The capital gains tax was introduced on the basis that it would increase the
fairness of the Canadian tax system and income distribution.  In this section,
I have questioned the conventional wisdom that "a buck is a buck" should be the
basis for an equitable tax system.  Basic economic theory suggests that capital
is not like income when it comes to national income accounting.  Taxing the
fruit and the tree has important implications for the size of future fruit
harvests.  Many capital gains are due to inflation and the capital gains tax
often amounts to the confiscation of real capital holdings. Some capital gains
are the return to risk-taking.  Taxing this activity leads to a reduction in
this activity, which is very important for economic growth.</p>

<p>          The capital gains tax is also designed to equalize the
distribution of after-tax income – "to prevent the rich from getting richer and
the poor from getting poorer".   The rationale for this policy is based on the
conventional wisdom that mainly high-income earners with incomes of more than
$100,000 a year pay the capital gains tax.  In fact, however, families that
earn less than $50,000 in income other than capital gains pay over half of the
tax.  In addition, in a small country like Canada, capital taxes do not result
in lower after-tax returns on capital.  The cost of the tax is shifted to
workers through lower wages and to the buyers of products through higher
prices.  Such shifting makes largely illusory the alleged beneficial effects of
the capital gains tax on the after-tax distribution of income in Canada.</p>

<p>          In the light of the preceding analysis we may conclude that there
are few real beneficial effects brought by the capital gains tax for the
fairness of the tax system and the distribution of income.  Combining the
findings reached in part one about the high efficiency cost of the tax with the
findings about its minimal effect on fairness suggest that Canadians would be
better off if the tax were abolished.</p>

<p></p>

<h3>III.     Revenue Implications</h3>


<p>One of the justifications for the imposition of the capital gains tax in
Canada in the early 1970s was to raise revenue to finance the general
operations of government, which in the spirit of the times was at a strong
upward trend.  There is considerable evidence that the tax may have achieved
this objective in the short run but that its detrimental effect on economic
growth has resulted in a reduction in overall tax revenues.</p>

<p>          As already noted, it is difficult to study the longer run effects
of the capital gains tax on economic growth and the accompanying tax revenues. 
However, it is much easier to find short-run effects, especially in the United
States, where capital gains tax rates have been changed a number of times
during the last 50 years.  Revenue data show clearly that decreases in the rate
resulted in higher revenues and that revenues declined in anticipation and in
the wake of rate increases.<a href="#_ftn11" name="_ftnref11" title="">11</a> 
This result is not difficult to explain.  Since the realization of capital
gains is at the discretion of the owner of the capital, so is the payment of
the tax.  Owners of capital manage their affairs through time to minimize their
tax obligations.</p>

<p>          Questions have been raised about the validity of these findings in
the longer run.  On a logical basis wealthholders with finite lives cannot
postpone the realization of capital gains forever.  At some point, even if only
after death, capital gains taxes are due.   For this reason, lower rates will
results in lower revenues.  Of course, this argument applies with extra force
when the capital gains tax is eliminated completely.  In that case even in the
short run revenues collected from the tax will be zero.</p>

<p>          The preceding analysis is deficient because it focuses too
narrowly on the relationship between rates and revenues on the capital gains
tax alone.  As argued above, reductions in the rate or the elimination of the
tax stimulate longer run growth in productivity and income through the
deepening of the capital stock, its more efficient use and other induced
changes.  Such higher income results in greater revenues from personal, sales
and business taxes.  The question is whether the revenue gains from these taxes
are likely to be greater than the losses from the lower rate or the elimination
of the capital gains tax.</p>

<p>          To answer this question we must look at the revenue presently
raised through the capital gains tax.  In this context it is interesting to
note that published government documents – the annual Budgets, publications by
Statistics Canada or the Department of Finance – do not contain this
information.  OECD statistics show capital gains tax revenues for most
industrial countries, but not Canada.<a href="#_ftn12" name="_ftnref12" title=
"">12</a>  For this reason, Joel Emes at the Fraser Institute produced an
estimate from a Revenue Canada database.  As noted above, he estimated the 1992
revenue to be $715.6 million, or about .3 percent of the total tax revenue that
year.  Even if this estimate is off by a factor of 3, the total revenue is
quite small.</p>

<p>          The other side of the coin is the expected gain in general tax
revenues due to the higher level of income stimulated by the elimination of the
tax.  Section one above discussed the empirical evidence produced by Kugler and
Lenz on the effect on the level of income in some Swiss cantons resulting from
their elimination of the capital gains tax.  The section also presented the
empirical evidence reviewed by Dahlby on the efficiency and income effects of
the elimination of taxes on capital.  Both of these papers suggest that the
elimination of the capital gains tax would result in a significantly higher
level of income.  We may therefore expect also a corresponding increase in
general tax revenue.</p>

<p>          Unfortunately, the available empirical evidence is not strong
enough to permit the conclusion that the elimination of the capital gains tax
will result in overall higher tax revenues.  However, the evidence is strong
enough to conclude with confidence that the overall revenue loss would be very
small at worst and that there would be significant gains at best.  Under either
scenario, revenue considerations should not play an important role in the
decision to eliminate the capital gains tax in Canada.</p>



<h3>IV.     The Costs of Administration</h3>

<p>When a business has to pay a tax on profits but not on capital gains,
incentives are created to use creative bookkeeping and legal maneuvers to turn
profits into capital gains.  The process of achieving this goal has become
known as "surplus stripping". </p>

<p>Essentially the process requires that the owners of a working company
establish a dummy corporation.  This dummy borrows money from a bank to buy all
of the shares of a working company.  The dummy company becomes the owner of all
of the real assets of the working company plus the profits it earned in the
preceding period.  These profits are referred to as surplus and are to be
turned into capital gains.</p>

<p>The next step in the process of stripping this surplus is for the working
company to use the money it received from the dummy corporation to buy back all
of its shares.  It thus becomes again the owner of its real assets but by
agreement, it leaves the surplus with the dummy corporation.  The dummy then
uses the money it received for the shares to repay the bank loan.  However, it
has left over the surplus, or profits of the working corporation.  The dummy
corporation is dissolved and in the process declares a capital gain equal to
the working company's profits.  The owners of the dummy corporation in effect
have turned the taxable profits of their working company into a non-taxable
capital gain.<a href="#_ftn13" name="_ftnref13" title="">13</a></p>

<p>A publication by the Department of Finance (1980) reviewed the history of
problems, which led to the adoption of the capital gains tax.  It reached the
following conclusion:</p>

<p><i>"The inability of the government to check surplus stripping abuses was,
in fact, the primary impetus for the comprehensive review of the tax system in
the early 1960s.  It led to the establishment of the Royal Commission on
Taxation."</i></p>

<p>The Carter Commission Report recommended the adoption of the capital gains
tax to prevent surplus stripping.  The government accepted this recommendation
and adopted a capital gains tax in 1972.</p>

<p>          At the 1999 symposium on capital gains taxation at the Fraser
Institute, a number of participants, who had been working in the financial
sector during the 1960s disputed the proposition that surplus stripping was a
major problem.  They noted that such stripping is not possible for large,
publicly held companies.  Only small, privately held companies were able to
engage in this kind of legal and financial maneuver.  It was not difficult for
the Department of Finance to prohibit such maneuvers, which so obviously had no
other purpose than the avoidance of taxes.  These observers suggested that
surplus stripping was a red herring to divert public attention from what
essentially was an increase in the overall burden of taxation to finance
increases in the size of government and its ability to redistribute income.</p>

<p>          To shed further light on this issue, the 2000 symposium brought to
Vancouver economists who were knowledgeable about the problems experienced in
their countries as a result of having no capital gains taxation.  Two of the
papers are of special relevance to the present analysis.</p>


<p><i>Empirical Evidence from Hong Kong and New Zealand</i></p>

<p>Berry Hsu and Chi-Wa Yuen (2000) discussed Hong Kong's experience.  They
provided a list of methods that can be used to turn profits into capital
gains.  Some are quite simple, like buying real estate with the intention of
reselling it, but claiming that the resulting profits were capital gains. 
Others are more sophisticated, like the sale of the right to a future stream of
income, claiming it to be a capital gain.</p>

<p>          These and other schemes have been tried and have been challenged
successfully by the Hong Kong revenue authorities.  These authorities are
guided in their actions by two, relatively simple anti-avoidance
principles:</p>


<p>"<i>The first sets out to disregard any 'artificial or fictitious'
transactions that do not in fact take place and any that reduce or would reduce
the amount of taxes payable.  The second applies a 'sole or dominant purpose'
test to determine whether a transaction is conducted mainly for the purpose of
obtaining tax benefits through the avoidance or postponement of the liability
to pay tax or the reduction in the amount thereof."</i> (Hsu and Yuen (2001),
p. xx)"</p>


<p>The decisions of the revenue authorities based on these principles are
challenged regularly by the affected parties.  A Board of Review hears
adjudicates these appeals.  Hsu and Yuen consider the rulings by the revenue
authorities and of the review board to reflect the magnitude of the efforts of
taxpayers to shift taxable income into non-taxable capital gains.  They
conclude:</p>


<p><i>"On the basis of the indirect evidence available to us we conclude that
the absence of a capital gains tax in Hong Kong has resulted in little, if any,
inefficiencies and inequities." </i> (p. yy)</p>

<p>Hong Kong, in so many ways is like no other "country" in the world and its
experiences may have only limited relevance to others.  Most important, the low
income and profits taxes, which keep low the returns to turning taxable income
into non-taxable capital gains.</p>

<p>            On the other hand, Hong Kong's practices for dealing with such
tax avoidance efforts show that it should be possible for Canada's revenue
agency to set out some simple anti-avoidance principles against which it, and
an appeals court, can evaluate any practices that appear to be designed to
avoid taxes.  Such a task would not be new since the present more favorable
rate of taxation of capital gains relative to other income already contains
strong incentives to avoid taxes by dividend stripping and the methods used in
Hong Kong.  Existing rules and regulations may be expected to apply fully in a
regime completely without capital gains taxes, though of course, the incentives
to get around these rules and regulations would be stronger for the private
sector.</p>

<p>          The paper on New Zealand by Robin Oliver (2001) gives a hint of
the kinds of difficulties encountered in a country that is more like Canada
than Hong Kong is.  Oliver, as a former tax consultant and in his present
position as an adviser in the revenue department, brings a point of view shaped
by his day-to-day battles with the private sector, which is constantly
inventing new methods for avoiding taxes through the zero capital gains tax
loophole.  He concludes:</p>


<p><i>"I would assert, after my long experience with the New Zealand tax regime
as a private consultant and government adviser, that the best possible system
is not one, which simply excludes capital gains from taxable income."</i>
(Oliver (2001), p.xx)</p>


<p>In the concluding section of his paper, Oliver modifies this strong
statement with the following:</p>


<p><i>"This paper has canvassed the problems posed for New Zealand's tax system
by the absence of a general capital gains tax.  Undoubtedly, if we had a
capital gains tax, the paper would have canvassed the problems posed by having
such a tax."</i> (p.yy)</p>


<p><i>Conclusion</i></p>


<p>The study of the experience of countries without capital gains taxes
suggests that the abolition of that tax in Canada would increase the troubles
and cost of preventing tax avoidance incurred by the revenue authorities.  It
would also increase private expenditures on efforts to find loopholes for
avoiding the tax and staying ahead of the tax authorities' efforts to close
those already in use.  On the other hand, the experience of other countries
also suggests that the task is manageable and can be handled by a large
bureaucracy already dedicated to limiting tax avoidance and evasion.  However,
there is no doubt that the expected higher costs for the prevention of
avoidance should enter into the benefit/cost analysis needed to make the case
for the elimination of the capital gains tax.</p>

<p></p>

<h3>V.      Summary and Policy Implications</h3>

<p>At the risk of oversimplification, the battle over the retention or
abolition of the capital gains tax is fought along lines characterized by two
catchy slogans:  "A buck is a buck" and "Tax the fruit but not the tree".  The
first slogan is about the distribution of income and the fairness of the
taxation system.  The second is about the efficiency implications of the tax
and how much it reduces economic growth and per capita incomes.</p>

<p>          Most people agree that both fairness and efficiency should be
considered in the design and operation of Canada's tax system.  The crucial
issue arises around the magnitudes of these two social objectives.</p>

<p>          This paper discussed the growing evidence on the size of the
efficiency losses due to the tax.  The large number of studies using the
concept of the marginal efficiency cost of taxes implies that the cost is
substantial.  The study of the Swiss experience is powerful and adds to direct
evidence on the effects of thet tax on income.  These results support the
notion that capital gains are not like other income from a number of points of
view that are important from an economic point of view.</p>

<p>          The prediction of higher income levels in the wake of the
elimination of the tax imply that tax revenues from all sources are likely to
increase if the capital gains tax is eliminated.  On the issue of vertical
equity, recent calculations have shown that the incidence of the capital gains
tax is much less progressive than had been believed.  Over half of it is paid
by families with incomes other than capital gains, which most people would
consider to be moderate rather than high.  On the issue of horizontal equity,
the evidence from Hong Kong and New Zealand suggests that revenue authorities
are able effectively to limit attempts at shifting taxable income into
non-taxable capital gains.</p>

<p>          The quality of the empirical evidence available is not sufficient
to engage in a formal benefit/cost analysis of the elimination of the capital
gains tax.  However, in my view the evidence is strong and clear enough to
suggest that the elimination of the tax will improve the incomes and well being
of Canadians by a margin large enough to outweigh the expected costs of
administration and in the form of reduced fairness.</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<h3>References</h3>


<p>Bartlett, Bruce (2001), "Why the Capital Gains Tax Rate Should be Zero".
Dallas, Texas: NCPA Policy Report No. 245, August</p>

<p>Dahlby, Bev (2001), "Restructuring the Canadian Tax System by changing the
Direct/Indirect Tax Mix", Paper for Fraser Institute Conference on Taxation,
Toronto, Ont., October 11, 2001</p>

<p>Department of Finance (1980), " A Review of the Taxation of Capital Gains in
Canada: An examination of the Canadian experience and of issues involved in
proposals for change", November</p>

<p>Eisner, Robert (1980), "Capital Gains and Income: Real Changes in the Value
of Capital in the United States, 1946-77", in Dan Usher, ed., <i>Measurement of
Capital</i>, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1980</p>

<p>Grubel, Herbert (2000), <i>Unlocking Canadian Capital:  The Case for Capital
Gains Tax Reform</i>, Vancouver: The Fraser Institute</p>

<p>------------------- (2001), <i>International Evidence on the Effects of Zero
Capital Gains Taxes</i>, Vancouver: The Fraser Institute</p>

<p>Hsu, Berry F. C. and Chi-Wa Yuen (2001), "Tax Avoidance due to the Zero
Capital Gains Tax: Some Indirect Evidence from Hong Kong", in Grubel (2001)</p>

<p>Haig, Robert M. (1921), "The Concept of Income – Economic and Legal
Aspects", in Robert M. Haig, ed., <i>The Federal Income Tax</i>, New York:
Columbia University Press</p>

<p>Jorgensen, Dale and Kun-Young Yun (1991), "The Excess Burden of Taxation in
the United States<i>", Journal of Accounting,  Auditing and Finance</i>, 6(4):
487-509</p>

<p>Kugler, Peter and Carlos Lenz (2001), "Capital Gains Taxation: Some
Experience from Switzerland", in Grubel (2001)</p>

<p>Kuznets, Simon (1941), <i>National Income and Its Composition</i>, 1919-38,
New York: National Bureau of Economic Research, 1941</p>

<p>OECD, (1997), Economic Surveys, Canada, Paris, page 85</p>

<p>Oliver, Robin (2001), "Capital Gains Tax: The New Zealand Case", in Grubel
(2001)</p>

<p>Poddar, Satya and M. English (1999) "Canadian Taxation of Personal
Investment Income", <i>Canadian Tax Journal</i>, 47,5,1270-1304</p>

<p>Simons, Henry C. (1938), <i>Personal Income Taxation</i>, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press</p>


</div>

<h3>Notes</h3>

<div>
<div id="ftn1"><p><a href="#_ftnref1" name="_ftn1" title="">1</a> In a study of the
United States, Jorgensen and Yun (1989) estimated the capital income tax to
have an efficiency cost of .924 while the sales and personal income tax costs
were .256 and .598, respectively.  The relatively small efficiency cost of
capital taxation in the United States is not surprising since it is the one
country in the world where the "small country assumption" does not hold. 
Capital inflows and outflows can be so large that they influence the "world"
rate of return, in contrast with Canadian flows that are so small as to leave
returns in the world unaffected.</p> </div>

<div id="ftn2"><p><a href="#_ftnref2" name="_ftn2" title="">2</a> For the full
details of the analysis see the paper published in Grubel (2001).</p> </div>

<div id="ftn3"><p><a href="#_ftnref3" name="_ftn3" title="">3</a> The latter group
excludes countries that index capital gains taxes to inflation (Australia,
Ireland, Luxembourg, Mexico and the United Kingdom).  The per capita growth
rate of these countries 1990-97 was 2.3 percent. </p></div>

<div id="ftn4"><p><a href="#_ftnref4" name="_ftn4" title="">4</a> The quotations
within the Bartlett quotation are  from Haig (1928), p. 120 and Simons (1938),
p. 157 </p></div>

<div id="ftn5"><p><a href="#_ftnref5" name="_ftn5" title="">5</a> Eisner (1980) p.
343 shows that in the United States there were no real, only nominal capital
gains during the period 1946-1977. </p></div>

<div id="ftn6"><p><a href="#_ftnref6" name="_ftn6" title="">6</a> These facts raise
the question why capital gains taxes are not adjusted for inflation so that
only real gains are taxed.  I have not discovered any answers to this
question.  At the 2000 Fraser Institute symposium on capital gains taxation a
number of economists reported on their countries' experiences with indexing. 
There are not theoretical objections and no practical pitfalls on why this
system is not in use in Canada and other industrial countries.  Unfortunately,
its introduction in the presence of a 50 percent exemption rate, as prevails in
Canada, would require the elimination of that exemption.  Such a policy would
be condemned widely as a tax increase, as it almost certainly would be during
the relative low rates of inflation that have prevailed in recent years and may
be expected.</p> </div>

<div id="ftn7"><p><a href="#_ftnref7" name="_ftn7" title="">7</a> For a graph
showing the share of all income taxes paid by the top 10 percent and 1 percent
of all income earners between 1997 and 1995 – regardless of the top marginal
income tax rates – is found in Grubel (2000), page 16.</p> </div>

<div id="ftn8"><p><a href="#_ftnref8" name="_ftn8" title="">8</a> See Grubel (2000)
for more information about these calculations. </p></div>

<div id="ftn9"><p><a href="#_ftnref9" name="_ftn9" title="">9</a> Jonathan
Kesselman has indicated to me in private correspondence that the calculations
made by Emes do not prove conclusively that lower income and middle income
Canadians pay the bulk of the capital gains tax.  He thinks that generally
high-income earners can be expected to report their capital gains in years that
their other incomes are below normal.  I agree with him that this issue can be
settled only by studies, which trace incomes and tax payments through time. 
Unfortunately, such panel data are not yet available in Canada.</p> </div>

<div id="ftn10"><p><a href="#_ftnref10" name="_ftn10" title="">10</a> I owe the
point on the shifting of the capital gains tax to Professor John Chant, who
made it in an unpublished note presented at the first Fraser Institute
conference on capital gains taxation held in Vancouver in September 1999.</p>
</div>

<div id="ftn11"><p><a href="#_ftnref11" name="_ftn11" title="">11</a> See Grubel
(2000) p. 19 for a graph showing this relationship between rates and revenues.</p>
</div>

<div id="ftn12"><p><a href="#_ftnref12" name="_ftn12" title="">12</a> Revenue Canada
has told me that this information is available by special request.  This leaves
open the question why, if the data are available, they are not published.</p>
</div>

<div id="ftn13">
<p><a href="#_ftnref13" name="_ftn13" title="">13</a> An analogous process can be
used to convert the income of professionals like physicians and lawyers into a
surplus of a business owned by them.  See Grubel (2001) for the way in which
such practices can be used to turn taxable personal income into no-taxable
capital gains. </p>
</div>
</div>

<p>[<a href="index.html">Contents</a>]</p>
<!-- end_body -->

<BR />
<BR />

<HR SIZE="1" WIDTH="100%" NOSHADE />

<P>
<A HREF="mailto:info@fraserinstitute.ca"><IMG CLASS="icon" 
SRC="/img/mail115.gif" ALT="E-Mail Icon" BORDER="0" /></A><BR />

<A HREF="mailto:info@fraserinstitute.ca">info@fraserinstitute.ca</A><BR />
4th Floor, 1770 Burrard Street, Vancouver, BC, Canada, V6J 3G7<BR />
Tel: (604) 688-0221 Fax: (604) 688-8539 Book Orders: 1-800-665-3558 ext. 580</p>

<P>
You can contact us at the above email address for any comments or 
information requests. Please report any dead links or technical problems.
</P>

    </TD>
  </TR>
</TABLE>

</BODY>
</HTML>